[RFC] Thread spawn hook (#3642)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/3642-thread-spawn-hook.md

///
/// If the hook returns an `Err`, thread spawning is aborted. In that case, the
/// function used to spawn the thread (e.g. `std::thread::spawn`) will return
/// the error returned by the hook.
///
/// Hooks can only be added, not removed.
///
/// The hooks will run in order, starting with the most recently added.
///
/// # Usage
///
/// ```
/// std::thread::add_spawn_hook(|_| {
///     ..; // This will run in the parent (spawning) thread.
///     Ok(move || {
///         ..; // This will run it the child (spawned) thread.
///     })
/// });
/// ```
///
/// # Example
///
/// ```
/// thread_local! {
///     static MY_THREAD_LOCAL: Cell<u32> = Cell::new(0);
/// }
///
/// std::thread::add_spawn_hook(|_| {
///     // Get the value of X in the spawning thread.
///     let value = MY_THREAD_LOCAL.get();
///
///     Ok(move || {
///         // Set the value of X in the newly spawned thread.
///         MY_THREAD_LOCAL.set(value);
///     })
/// });
/// ```
pub fn add_spawn_hook<F, G>(hook: F)
where
    F: 'static + Sync + Fn(&Thread) -> std::io::Result<G>,
    G: 'static + Send + FnOnce();
```

# Implementation

The implementation could simply be a static `RwLock` with a `Vec` of

> (boxed/leaked) `dyn Fn`s, or a simple lock free linked list of hooks.

Reviewer: As an alternative, we could use [global registration](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/125119)
- Limits what you can do in your `hook`
- Would require a macro and some complexity
- Would only work for static linking with `std`
- Blocks this on a language feature proposal

Author: Are there any advantages to that approach? I can only think of downsides ^^'.

Reviewer: Removes all overhead when not used and keeps the overhead minimal.  Likely won't be a problem.  I mostly mentioned this because I had the thought to use this when it was posted but as I wrote up my post I realized how long the downsides were and thought it worth recording in case others have the thought.

Author: FWIW, the cost of spawning a new thread (not only allocating its stack, its Thread object, etc., but also the actual creation of the thread through a syscall) completely dwarfs any overhead from an indirect function call, so I don't think overhead is an argument here.

(For similar reasons, `std::panic::set_hook` is also just a simple function, rather than a magical attribute like no_std's `#[panic_handler]`.)

I'll add a note in the RFC on this.

  that does not work across threads when not spawned by libstd.)

# Rationale and alternatives

## Use of `io::Result`.

The hook returns an `io::Result` rather than the `FnOnce` directly.
This can be useful for e.g. resource limiting or possible errors while
registering new threads, but makes the signature more complicated.

An alternative could be to simplify the signature by removing the `io::Result`,
which is fine for most use cases.

## Global vs thread local effect

`add_spawn_hook` has a global effect (similar to e.g. libc's `atexit()`),
to keep things simple.

An alternative could be to store the list of spawn hooks per thread,
that are inherited to by new threads from their parent thread.
That way, a hook added by `add_spawn_hook` will only affect the current thread
and all (direct and indirect) future child threads of the current thread,
not other unrelated threads.

Both are relatively easy and efficient to implement (as long as removing hooks
is not an option).

However, the first (global) behavior is conceptually simpler and allows for more
flexibility. Using a global hook, one can still implement the thread local

> behavior, but this is not possible the other way around.

Author: I don't see how Command::pre_exec is related. That provides a closure to run for one specific Command, not a way to hook into all future Commands.

> behavior, but this is not possible the other way around.

Reviewer 2: It seems theoretically possible to implement the global behavior via the thread-local behavior, using a thread-local hook that installs itself in the new thread. But I agree that that's not ideal.

> behavior, but this is not possible the other way around.

Reviewer 3: @m-ou-se If the local effect isn't `thread::Builder::add_spawn_hook()` I'm not sure what is meant by "local effect" in this section then :thinking:

///     })
/// });
/// ```
///
/// # Example
///
/// ```
/// thread_local! {
///     static MY_THREAD_LOCAL: Cell<u32> = Cell::new(0);
/// }
///
/// std::thread::add_spawn_hook(|_| {
///     // Get the value of X in the spawning thread.
///     let value = MY_THREAD_LOCAL.get();
///
///     Ok(move || {
///         // Set the value of X in the newly spawned thread.
///         MY_THREAD_LOCAL.set(value);
///     })
/// });
/// ```
pub fn add_spawn_hook<F, G>(hook: F)
where
    F: 'static + Sync + Fn(&Thread) -> std::io::Result<G>,
    G: 'static + Send + FnOnce();
```

# Implementation

The implementation could simply be a static `RwLock` with a `Vec` of
(boxed/leaked) `dyn Fn`s, or a simple lock free linked list of hooks.

Functions that spawn a thread, such as `std::thread::spawn` will eventually call
`spawn_unchecked_`, which will call the hooks in the parent thread, after the
child `Thread` object has been created, but before the child thread has been
spawned. The resulting `FnOnce` objects are stored and passed on to the child
thread afterwards, which will execute them one by one before continuing with its
main function.

> # Downsides

Reviewer 4: When this feature is used as intended, it will now be the case, where it wasn't before, that Rust threads inherit some characteristics from _the thread which spawned them._ This could result in unintended nondeterministic behavior when a thread is spawned lazily. For example, `rayon` lazily spawns its global thread pool the first time a parallel operation is used.

Therefore, I think that

* The above should be listed as a downside (it's one more piece of complexity that library authors may need to keep in mind).

* There should be a way to opt out in `thread::Builder`, resulting in the new thread having the same state as if it was created first thing in `main()`.

  (In another design I have seen for tasks inheriting state, for a language other than Rust, there was no opt-out, *but* there was also no equivalent of `static` items, so it was always *possible* for the action that captured the local state (here, thread spawning) to be be done exactly at the time of construction of the thing that interacts with the spawned thread, rather than lazily later. Because Rust has `static` items but a thread can't be spawned at program loading time, I think we need this option.)

- The implementation requires allocation for each hook (to store them in the
  global list of hooks), and an allocation each time a hook is spawned
  (to store the resulting closure).

> - A library that wants to make use of inheriting thread locals will have to
>   register a global hook, and will need to keep track of whether its hook has
>   already been added (e.g. in a static `AtomicBool`).

Reviewer 4: `AtomicBool` isn't sufficient; there are more than two states required to implement this initialization without any race conditions. The right tool is [`std::sync::Once`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/struct.Once.html), which is exactly for this shape of problem.

```suggestion
- A library that wants to make use of inheriting thread locals will have to
  register a global hook, and will need to keep track of whether its hook has
  already been added (e.g. in a static `std::sync::Once`).
```

- The hooks will not run if threads are spawned through e.g. pthread directly,
  bypassing the Rust standard library.
  (However, this is already the case for output capturing in libtest:
  that does not work across threads when not spawned by libstd.)

# Rationale and alternatives

> ## Use of `io::Result`.

Reviewer 4: A hazard here is that lazy library authors might write an insufficiently contextful error. In particular, they might use the `?` operator to return a real IO error from some kind of per-thread resource creation; such errors are already cryptic, and become more so when separated from their original context.

Therefore, it might make sense to ensure that, if `thread::Builder::spawn()` fails due to a hook, the error it returns is a *wrapped* error whose `to_string()` is something along the lines of "failed to execute thread spawn hook" and whose `Error::source()` is the error the hook returned. (The message could even include the [`Location`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/panic/struct.Location.html) of the `set_hook()` call, so that when debugging, one knows _which_ hook to blame.)

If that is done, then the error type can, and perhaps should, be something other than `io::Error`, because there is no advantage to the hook _producing_ an `io::Error` specifically, and making it an IO error might be misleading. (Use `Box<dyn Error + Send + Sync>` if nothing better comes to mind.)

size).

An alternative interface that wouldn't require any store is possible, but has
downsides. Such an interface would spawn the child thread *before* running the
hooks, and allow the hooks to execute a closure on the child (before it moves on
to its main function). That looks roughly like this:

```rust
std::thread::add_spawn_hook(|child| {
    // Get the value on the parent thread.
    let value = MY_THREAD_LOCAL.get();
    // Set the value on the child thread.
    child.exec(|| MY_THREAD_LOCAL.set(value));
});
```

This could be implemented without allocations, as the function executed by the
child can now be borrowed from the parent thread.

However, this means that the parent thread will have to block until the child
thread has been spawned, and block for each hook to be finished on both threads,
significantly slowing down thread creation.

Considering that spawning a thread involves several allocations and syscalls,
it doesn't seem very useful to try to minimize an extra allocation when that
comes at a significant cost.

## `impl` vs `dyn` in the signature

An alternative interface could use `dyn` instead of generics, as follows:

```rust

> pub fn add_spawn_hook<F, G>(
>     hook: Box<dyn Fn(&Thread) -> io::Result<Box<dyn FnOnce() + Send>> + Send + Sync>
> );

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
pub fn add_spawn_hook<F, G>(
    hook: Box<dyn Fn(&Thread) -> Box<dyn FnOnce() + Send> + Send + Sync>
);
```
